Building an API pt. 3 - lesson 3: "Create" updates (#149)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: api-3-database-models-read/create.md

| `new_book = Book( ... )` | We create an instance of `Book` using the data we read from `request_body`. We assign this new instance to the `new_book` variable.|
| `title=title, description=description` | We use keyword arguments matching our model attributes and use our variables holding data from the `request_body` to create a `Book` instance|
| `db.session.add(new_book)` | `db.session` is the database's way of collecting changes that need to be made. Here, we are saying we want the database to add `new_book`.|
| `db.session.commit()` | Here, we are saying we want the database to save and commit the collected changes. We've only made one change here (adding the new Book), but a session can track multiple changes on both newly added and existing model records all at once. |
| `return ..., ...` | For each endpoint, we must _return_ something Flask can use for a response. The comma means that this is returning a `tuple` of two values. |
| `response` | The first element of the tuple is the dictionary that will become the `JSON` response body. |

> | `201` | The second value in the `tuple`, `201`, is the response code. When a second value isn't specified, `200` is always the default value. |

Author: I'm happy to cut it since it would have just been in the previous lesson or two, if there was a bit more space between the initial info and here I wouldn't mind repeating as a reminder.

}
```

Finally, the most appropriate successful response status code ids `201 Created`, indicating the resource had been successfully created. The response body could take several forms, ranging from an empty body, up to a JSON document representing the created resource (useful for communicating back the `id` that was assigned), or anything in between. We will choose to return a JSON document with the same format we used for our hardcoded objects, a dictionary with the keys:
- id
- title
- description

| Response Status | Example Response Body                            |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |

> | `201 Created`   | `{ "id": 1,`</br>&nbsp;&nbsp;`  "title": "Fictional Book Title",`</br>&nbsp;&nbsp;`  "description": "A fantasy novel set in an imaginary world" }` |

Author: Please let me know if anyone knows a better way to format a chunk of code in a table like this 🙏🏻

Author: Ooo, I haven't tried a raw HTML table, so I'll give that a go. Thanks for the suggestion!

Author: In an HTML table, if I wrap the dictionary in <code> tags, it collapses the whitespace and I still need to add characters for new lines and spacing. If I use <pre> around <code> it keeps the dictionary structure, but it adds spacing around the code such that it looks a bit weird 😭

I will say that the HTML table is a bit easier to parse than the line holding the dictionary as markdown, and I do think the rendered result is easier to read with the <pre> tag than the magenta code highlighting. I don't love the idea of us maintaining a bunch of custom formatting for a single table to try to fix the spacing  with <pre>, but I'm down if the team overall is.

Some of my experimenting:

![Screenshot 2024-04-17 at 3 18 42 PM](https://github.com/Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2/assets/97124999/eba41413-8c6b-4cc2-a603-afb8afdd909e)
![Screenshot 2024-04-17 at 3 34 52 PM](https://github.com/Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2/assets/97124999/25acb186-b22d-42e2-8e8a-5bf2b71b252a)

Reviewer: Yeah, I think this is really promising. The only other alternative that I can see would be to stop using a table entirely. In the same way that we use inline styles to modify column widths, could that clobber whatever margin/padding is affecting the pre?

Author: Success! 
![Screenshot 2024-04-17 at 4 27 19 PM](https://github.com/Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2/assets/97124999/581170d5-4893-40ae-a40d-a5924745784b)

Reviewer: Woo!

}
```

Finally, the most appropriate successful response status code ids `201 Created`, indicating the resource had been successfully created. The response body could take several forms, ranging from an empty body, up to a JSON document representing the created resource (useful for communicating back the `id` that was assigned), or anything in between. We will choose to return a JSON document with the same format we used for our hardcoded objects, a dictionary with the keys:
- id
- title
- description

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Response Status</th>
    <th>Example Response Body</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><code>201 Created</code></td>
    <td><pre style="margin:0px;"><code>{
    "id": 1,
    "title": "Fictional Book Title",
    "description": "A fantasy novel set in an imaginary world"
}</code></pre>
    </td>
  </tr>

> </table>

Author: I think this is something we should do across the curriculum and I will make a ticket for that, I'm betting we have other code examples in tables that would benefit from switching to an HTML table. 

Around the Pt. 1 Read All Books table, I want to update lessons we touch as we go. My feelings are that continuing the flask & content updates through the remaining lessons is higher priority than going back to format that table now even though it's a small change, but if other folks feel strongly about addressing it sooner, I'm good.

> </table>

Author: Ticket: https://app.asana.com/0/1201700438643002/1207164657931567/f

> </table>

Reviewer: But shh... I might have snuck in the change to api-2-lesson-1 since we had just seen that during the review today.

### Creating an Endpoint

Let's define the `POST /books` route by adding the following code to our `book_routes.py` file:

```python
from flask import Blueprint, make_response, request
from app.models.book import Book
from ..db import db

books_bp = Blueprint("books_bp", __name__, url_prefix="/books")

@books_bp.post("")
def create_book():
    request_body = request.get_json()
    title = request_body["title"]
    description = request_body["description"]

    new_book = Book(title=title, description=description)
    db.session.add(new_book)
    db.session.commit()

    response = {
        "id": new_book.id,
        "title": new_book.title,
        "description": new_book.description,
    }

>     return make_response(response, 201)

Author: Changes have been made to the hello-books-api branches, I'll update any code samples through the lesson to remove `make_response` in the create route.

| `from ..db import db`, `from ... import Book`         | We need to import the necessary modules to create our `Book` model and access our database                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| `from flask import Blueprint, make_response, request` | We need to import our Flask dependencies. Python supports comma-separated importing.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| `books_bp = Blueprint("books", __name__, ...)`        | Our `Blueprint` instance. We'll use it to group routes that start with `/books`. `"books_bp"` is the debugging name for this `Blueprint`. `__name__` provides information the blueprint uses for certain aspects of routing.                                                                                   |

> | `url_prefix="/books"`                                 | A keyword argument. This `url_prefix` indicates that _every_ endpoint using this Blueprint should be treated like it starts with `/books`. We should use this blueprint for all of our RESTful routes that start with `/books`!                                                                             |

Author: I get that it will reinforce the info, but it isn't the focus of the lesson so I'm happy to leave it off rather than repeat it.

| `title = request_body["title"]`                       | We access the `request_body` values to get the data for a new `Book` instance                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| `new_book = Book( ... )`                              | We create an instance of `Book` using the data in `request_body`. We assign this new instance to the `new_book` variable.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| `(title=title, description=description)`              | We use keyword arguments matching our model attributes and use our variables holding data from the `request_body` to create a `Book` instance                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> | `db.session.add(new_book)`                            | `db.session` is the database's way of collecting changes that need to be made. Here, we are saying we want the database to add `new_book`.                                                                                                                                                                  |

Author: I see what you mean... I think it's just different enough that I'm not sure how helpful students will find the comparison.

| `db.session.commit()`                                 | Here, we are saying we want the database to save and commit the collected changes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| `return`                                              | For each endpoint, we must _return_ a response                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

> | `make_response(...)`                                  | This function instantiates a `Response` object. A `Response` object is generally what we want to return from Flask endpoint functions.                                                                                                                                                                      |

Author: Leaving a note to self to update the table along with code examples for the changed return statement.

| `response, 201`                                       | The first parameter to `make_response()` is the JSON response. We can define the status code of the `Response` by passing an integer as the second argument to `make_response()`. When a second argument isn't specified `200` is always the default value.     

### !callout-info

## Missing error handling in the create route

Folks may have noticed that our new function can crash if any required keys are missing! If you'd like the practice, feel free to add logic to handle the exceptions that could be raised for now. We will address error handling for creating models later in the Building an API series.

### !end-callout

### Blueprints

For this project, **Hello Books**, we are using `Blueprints` to create a group of related routes (endpoints).

> Recall that we we have already registered `book_bp` in in `app/__init__.py` inside our `create_app`. function.                                                                                                           |

Author: That gives much more use to this section! I was considering cutting it, but I felt like some acknowledgement was useful.

> ### !callout-info

Reviewer: With the moving of `make_response`, can we cut this callout?

Author: Yeah, it doesn't make much sense now we're returning a tuple, which folks have already seen.

> For this project, **Hello Books**, we are using `Blueprints` to create a group of related routes (endpoints).
> 
> Recall that we we have already registered `book_bp` in in `app/__init__.py` inside our `create_app`. function.                                                                                                           |

Author: GitHub wasn't letting me apply the initial suggestion, retrying by highlighting just the changed content.

```suggestion
When we set up our initial book routes (which are currently commented out), we registered them on a Blueprint using the Blueprint route decorator functions. Then we had to remember to register the entire Blueprint with the `app`, so that the `app` would know about the endpoints grouped under the Blueprint.

Since we have already registered `book_bp` in `app/__init__.py` inside our `create_app` function, as we add additional routes to our Blueprint, `app` will be able to see them without needing to go back and updating the `create_app` function again. But if we create any additional Blueprints, then we'll need to be sure to register them with the `app` the same way we did with `book_bp`.
```

> Recall that we we have already registered `book_bp` in in `app/__init__.py` inside our `create_app`. function.                                                                                                           |

Author: GitHub wasn't letting me apply the initial suggestion, retrying by highlighting just the changed content.

```suggestion
When we set up our initial book routes (which are currently commented out), we registered them on a Blueprint using the Blueprint route decorator functions. Then we had to remember to register the entire Blueprint with the `app`, so that the `app` would know about the endpoints grouped under the Blueprint.

Since we have already registered `book_bp` in `app/__init__.py` inside our `create_app` function, as we add additional routes to our Blueprint, `app` will be able to see them without needing to go back and updating the `create_app` function again. But if we create any additional Blueprints, then we'll need to be sure to register them with the `app` the same way we did with `book_bp`.
```

<summary>Is there a way to declare "/" as valid a route path?</summary>

For a little more flexibility, we _could_ choose to use `"/"` as the route path and include the keyword argument `strict_slashes=False` in our route decorator:
```python
@books_bp.post("", strict_slashes=False)
```

>  This tells the route to treat a URI the same whether or not it ends in `/`. Accepting either variation can make using our API a little easier for clients.

Author: Remove this whole section about blueprints & "/", it's duplicated from an earlier lesson and doesn't feel important to reinforce for students.

Reviewer: Ha ha. Why on earth did we feel the need to duplicate this? Maybe it started here and then got pulled forward?

In any case, I'd be onboard with removing it here.

> 

Reviewer: For the line above, "throughout this should" → "throughout this series should"? Though, I actually find that whole passage a little off kilter.

Maybe
> Unlike our GET routes, we can't directly test a POST route using the browser. This is because when we type an address into the browser's address bar, it always makes a GET request to that address. This was exactly what we needed to check that our get book routes were working, but won't help us try out our create book route. Instead, we'll use Postman to send a POST request that includes the necessary data in the request body.
>
> To do so, in Postman, we:

Author: This does read much clearer than the original, I like that change.

- Set the method to `POST`
- Set the request URL to `localhost:5000/books`

> - Configure an HTTP response body to `raw` and `JSON`, and add in the sample request body:

Reviewer: rewords to map more closely to the language in the UI. Also request, not response
```suggestion
- Select the request `Body` tab, using the `raw` option with `JSON` selected in the list that appears, then add in a sample request body such as:
```

```json
{
  "title": "Fictional Book Title",
  "description": "A fantasy novel set in an imaginary world"
}
```

> ![Screenshot of using Postman to send a POST request to create a Book](../assets/api-3-database-models-read/create-postman-output.png)
> _Fig. Screenshot of using Postman to send a POST request to create a Book. ([Full size image](../assets/api-3-database-models-read/create-postman-output.png))_

Reviewer: we don't need to say this is a screenshot
```suggestion
![The Postman query interface configured as described in the text. The request was successful, so the response area shows a JSON object for the created Book object.](../assets/api-3-database-models-read/create-postman-output.png)
_Fig. A successful POST request to create a book, sent using Postman. ([Full size image](../assets/api-3-database-models-read/create-postman-output.png))_
```

> Lastly, don't forget to exercise patience! It takes patience to discover how to debug with so many tools, windows, and screens.

Reviewer: We're not really talking about debugging here, so this sounds out of place. I'd lean towards cutting it, or rephrasing it more like this. Maybe it should be a callout in that case?
```suggestion
We have many tools to juggle while building and testing our endpoints, and it can take time to get a feel for how to use them all together in a development workflow. Be patient wwith yourself!
```

### Manually Testing with `psql`

Manually sending a request to our create route with Postman confirms that our route sends back a `Book` record, but does it guarantee that the Book is actually stored in our database? No, it doesn't! 

To be sure that our records are created and exist in the local database, for now we can use `psql`! To do so, we would start up `psql`, connect to our `hello-books-development` database, and run an appropriate query to get the records from the `book` table.

Let's try it out on our own! We can refer back to the Intro to SQL lessons if we need a reminder about how to write a query like this. Later in this series we will look at ways to automate our testing so that we don't need to rely on manually checking each scenario when we make changes.

### Debugging

> 
> Recall that our tools for debugging include:

Reviewer: this feels like it needs some additional support.

```suggestion

For the theoretical developer writing the code in this lesson, everything worked on the first try. They used Postman to send a request and they got back the appropriate response. But everything working correctly on the first try is much more the exception than the rule.

If we try to exercise a route and it _doesn't_ work, first of all, we shouldn't feel bad about it. Running into issues is common and expected. But the next thing we should do is remember that our routes are code just like any other code, and we can debug them. Because we're working with a database, we may also need to check whether the expected data exists as a result of our endpoints.

We haven't looked at how the VS Code debugger can be used to step through our route code (though this is possible!), but we do already have several other tools that can help us zero in on the cause of a problem:

```

- Using the response that appears in Postman

> - Using the server logs

Reviewer: It's easy for folks to forget that the "logs" we mean are just what Flask prints in the terminal (at least during development)
- also, what should we look for in the logs
```suggestion
- Using the server logs (displayed in the terminal while Flask is running) to check status codes, error details, and `print`ed output
```

- Using `psql` to check the local database

## Check for Understanding

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge

> * type: multiple-choice

Reviewer: ❤️

##### !question

Assume that we have a `Note` model that contains only `id` and `message` attributes. 

Which entry below describes a route that follows best practices for creating a Note resource?

##### !end-question
##### !options

a| ```python
@notes_bp.post("")
def create_note():
    request_body = request.get_json()
    message = request_body["message"]

    new_note = Note(message=message)
    db.session.add(new_note)
    db.session.commit()

    return {
        "id": new_note.id,
        "message": new_note.message
    }
```
b| ```python
@notes_bp.post("")
def create_note():
    request_body = request.get_json()
    message = request_body["message"]

    new_note = Note(message=message)
    db.session.add(new_note)
    db.session.commit()

    response = {
        "id": new_note.id,
        "message": new_note.message
    }
    return make_response(response, 201)
```
c| ```python
@notes_bp.put("")
def create_note():
    request_body = request.get_json()
    message = request_body["message"]

    new_note = Note(message=message)
    db.session.add(new_note)
    db.session.commit()

    response = {
        "id": new_note.id,
        "message": new_note.message
    }

>     return make_response(response, 201)

Reviewer: Per today's curriculum discussion, switch to tuple return
```suggestion
    return response, 201
```

Author: I'll go through & update each of these options
